SDT Part 1: How do we learn cause and effect? 
This is the first in a series of articles where I explain a new approach to causal inference I have been working on called causal statistical decision theory or CSDT for short.
This introduces some key questions about causation and extremely briefly surveys some answers to these questions given by the 18th century Scottish philosopher David Hume. Hume is worth addressing because the questions he raises about causality are still the key questions we have today, even though many of his answers are by now obsolete. These questions are: 
    • What do we mean when we say something causes something else? 
    • How do we learn that something causes something else?
Don’t treat this as a real analysis of Hume’s views. Firstly, I don’t know enough about his views to write such a work. Secondly, I am really writing about CSDT, so I have plastered over many key issues and avoided careful definition of his terms. It is a Hume-flavoured introduction to causality, not an analysis of Hume.
Examples of causes and effects vs a theory of causality
Causal relationships obviously exist. We can all agree on many examples of causes and effects: wind makes flags flutter, rain makes the ground wet, watching sad movies makes me cry, chili makes food hot. While many people can be collectively wrong about things sometimes (COVID-19 did grow into a pandemic), I can’t imagine being persuaded by anybody that wind doesn’t actually make flags flutter. Even though I’m confident that wind makes flags flutter, I have a hard time explaining how I came to this conclusion. I know that it can’t simply be because I’ve seen many flags fluttering on windy days. I also doubt that it is a result of my understanding of physics — as far as non-professionals go, I think I’m no slouch when it comes to physics, but I could easily imagine being convinced that my understanding of wind-flag interaction was wrong. Nonetheless, I am sure that wind makes flags flutter.
Aristotle, apparently, felt so sure of his knowledge of causes and effects that he believed [causal relationships could be logically deduced](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hume/#Cau), that they are more like mathematical facts than things may learn about the world. According to this view, we could imagine deriving the tendency of wind to make flags flutter from pure mathematics. Unfortunately, I’m pretty sure this is impossible, and I definitely haven’t managed to do it myself. Aristotle’s view was, apparently, largely accepted for about 2000 years until it was challenged by Hume ([same link](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hume/#Cau)) who argued that we must learn about causal relationships from experience. Like me, Hume doubted that we could derive causal relationships from reason alone: pure mathematics can’t tell me that wind makes flags flutter, nor that eating chili would make my mouth feel hot.
The fact that causes and effects must be learned raises the original question of how they are learned. In order to answer this question, we also need to know what exactly we mean when we talk about causes and effects. A tempting — but wrong — definition of causation is via association: “wind makes flags flutter” could mean “when the wind blows, flags will flutter”. But this definition is well known to be lacking: when my calendar says it’s September, the wind blows more. However, the reading of my calendar obviously doesn’t cause the wind to blow. On the other hand, association does seem to play a role — I can’t think of two things that I believe are causes and effects but where I expect the effect to happen completely at random with no respect for whether the cause has happened or not.
The fact that associations are an ingredient in causal relationships suggests that part of how we learn about causes and effects is from observing causes and effects happening together. However, there also needs to be something else that allows us to conclude that we’re not just seeing an association between wind and fluttering, but that the wind actually causes the fluttering. Hume’s proposal (as I understand it) was that causal relationships consist of two elements: firstly, we have the fact that one thing usually follows the other, and secondly we have an idea that there is a connection between the two things happening. That is, he says the association is something that really happens “out there in the world”, but the causal connection is part of our mental model of the world. Furthermore, the fact that we decide that some things don’t just happen together but are causally connected is a “mental habit”, not derived from any indication that the cause and effect actually have any connection. This last proposition is not really accepted today; most people think there is something special about causal relationships that distinguishes them from mere associations. Even if our tendency to regard things as causally connected is merely a “mental habit”, it’s useful mental habit, and it wouldn’t be useful if we were inclined to regard calendars and wind as causally connected. So the notion that causes are “inside our heads” still leaves open the question of when it would be useful to think that one thing causes another.
Despite the fact that this answer isn’t totally satisfactory, considering causal relationships be part of our mental models suggests a different way of studying them. Suppose that instead of causal relationships, we are trying to understand a mysterious bent piece of metal so we can make a satisfactory replica. We could carefully study the properties of the metal: its weight, its shape, its tensile strength and elasticity, and do our best to create a replica. Alternatively, if we knew that the purpose of this piece of metal was to create light, we could produce a satisfactory replica more easily by dipping some string in kerosene. Furthermore, guided by the purpose we might also ask more pertinent questions about our piece of metal — for example, its electrical resistance, and how to avoid it breaking almost immediately when a current is passed through it.
We can also identify purposes of our mental models that involve causes and effects. One purpose is to inform decisions and study how we can build models that inform decisions without regard for our intuitions of causes and effects. Causal Statistical Decision Theory, which I am introducing in this series of articles, is motivated by this second kind of investigation — what kinds of models could be used to inform decisions, and how could these models be learned? Before I write a detailed explanation of CSDT, I will discuss more modern understandings of causation in Part 2: Structures and Counterfactuals.
